Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lob. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Patrick Hassan. He is
a lecturer at the School of English Communication and
Philosophy at Cardiff University in the UK. His primary
areas of interest are moral and existential philosophy. And
today we're focusing on his book, Nietzsche's Struggle Against
pessimism. So, Doctor Hassan, welcome to the show, it's
a big pleasure to have everyone.
It's a pleasure to be here. Thank you for
having me.
So let's start perhaps with this. Uh What is
pessimism? I mean, when philosophers specifically talk about pessimism,
what, what are they exactly referring to? When is
there just one type of pessimism or are there
varieties of pessimism?
Good. Yeah. So I think it's really important to,
to distinguish as you just did between how we
might use this term colloquially and how philosophers use
this term, right? So, um outside of academic philosophy,
when people talk about pessimism, they usually mean something
like it's a psychological disposition to maybe expect the
worst, the worst to happen or to see the
glass half empty as it were. Um But in
philosophy, pessimism, it, it can be used in a
variety of different ways, but it tends to be
the view that life is not worth living or
that nonexistence is preferable to existence. And this might
be because whichever things we find to be the
most valuable, like our, our ultimate values, values, which
give us meaning and direction, which demand responses from
us. These things are unrealizable or, or unreachable. Um
So I think that's the definition which most people
have in mind in, in philosophy, when they talk
about pessimism. Um It's certainly the definition which became
the de facto definition of pessimism in the 19th
century, which we'll, we'll talk a lot about today,
I'm sure. Um But yes, it i it probably
is, is appropriate to just say that there are
like a lot of philosophical terms, pessimism can be
used to refer to a few different views. Um
So this might be, for example, a historical thesis
that is just a claim that um contemporary culture
has fallen from some golden age or some ideal
of humanity. Um So it was again in the
19th century, quite popular to think that the ancient
Greeks in the fifth century was the pinnacle of
human culture and society and creativity. Um All the
Italian renaissance. Uh And that since then, we've degenerated
and declined in various ways in, in political, moral,
aesthetic domains. OK. So that, that's one version of
pessimism is a historical claim that uh we've fallen
from some ideal. And again, there's stronger versions of
that too. So maybe the, the AAA claim about
the future that we will continue to decline or
degenerate in some way. And you see versions of
this in a lot of contemporary discourse outside of
academia that um for systemic reasons, perhaps there will
be political catastrophe. Uh You see this in discussions
of nuclear deterrence, for example, um political catastrophe with
ongoing wars over resources, environmental catastrophe uh in climate
change debates. So uh this kind of doomsayer predictive
pessimism is, is again a kind of um view
where the label pessimism might get used. Um Another
version might be the a modal claim which is
just the inversion of the Leibniz and claim that
this is the best of all possible worlds, right?
And actually, some pessimists have defended a view like
this, that this is not just a, a bad
world, but it's the worst of all possible worlds,
right? Um So Schopenhauer, someone who we're gonna talk
about probably in quite some detail. Um HAS it
at least in one place in the second volume
of his major work, the world has won representation
offers us kind of inverted fine tuning argument for
this view that this world is as bad as
it possibly could be if it was to exist
at all because of the the delicate nature of
the elements which which um give rise to life.
So that could also be described as pessimism. But
Id, I do think that the primary position which
people have in mind in philosophy, when they're talking
about pessimism and which has generated most of the
dispute has been this evaluative claim that life is
not worth living um that the, the values that
we endorse are unrealizable and so nonexistence is preferable
to existence.
Mhm There, there are many interesting ideas there and
uh let me just comment that for example, when
it comes to the political side of things, as
you mentioned briefly there. Yeah. Uh ON social media
and elsewhere, nowadays, we see a lot of discourse
particularly from people on the right wing, but sometimes
also people on the left wing, the more traditionalist
primitive types, uh sometimes even wanting to go back
to the Roman Empire, not just the Rens, but
even the Roman Empire and saying that we particularly
in the West are all a bunch of the
gens. But
you're right. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. And then uh I mean, I, I
guess that one thing that we might come back
to later uh is that, I mean, uh it's
interesting because when it comes to pessimism, sometimes people
are referring to life or existence itself. But other
times like in those particular political examples, they are
referring more to particular kinds of cultural and social
trends and not exactly about life as it is,
let's say. Yeah,
I think that's a good distinction. So um yeah,
some of the most of the debates about pessimism
in, in philosophy, in particular, in the 19th century
were um focused upon this kind of much broader
pessimism about life itself about um existence as such
and our, our relation to the world as individuals.
Um But I think you're right that there are
these kind of more local versions of pessimism which
are making claims about a particular um era, particular,
particular kind of cultural um formation. Um And, and
I think that you're right, this has leaked into
um contemporary discourse in the, in the so called
cultural wars. Um I do think you find it
on in, in both left wing circles and right
wing circles, but um you're absolutely right that, yeah,
there's a, there's a dominant trend within um yeah,
the particularly these right wing circles which harken back
to a kind of bygone age, a kind of
an age where um our values were realized and
that we may or may not be able to
recapture um in some way. But um yes, that
could be the Roman Empire that could be sort
of some period in the middle ages. It does
vary depending upon one's one's values. But I mean,
the, the precedent is set for that by figures
in the 19th century, um particularly those like um
Jacob Burkhardt, um Bach Hoven as well who were
at Basel and were big influences upon Nietzsche who
will come to talk about. Um So not just
in, in the academic domain but also in the
the cultural domain there. I mean, this is this
kind of historical or cultural pessimism is running through
uh a lot of Wagner and, and other cultural
figures and artistic figures that had a profound influence
uh and still have a profound influence on, on
European thought.
So we're going to focus for obvious reasons on
the 19th century here today because it's the century
that Nietzsche lived in and uh his major influences,
let's say, but do we know how old pessimism
is in intellectual history? And of course, we're focusing
here on Western intellectual history.
Yeah, that's a good question. So, um there are
elements of what we would consider pessimistic thought. Um
YOU know, as a, as far back as the
sort of third century BC. Um So, uh Heus
of Cyrene uh was a philosopher who is reported
to have pessimistic views um or at least elements
of, of what we recognize as pessimism um in
the middle ages. Uh You find uh even outside
of, of the Western tradition, you find um Sufi
poets in the Islamic world like Omar Khayyam, um
Alma Ari have views which reflect the kinds of
positions which those like Schopenhauer are developing in, in
more sort of philosophically rigorous ways. Um And you
will also find pessimistic thought. And again, this is
something Copen tries to draw attention to. You'll also
find strands of pessimistic thought, not necessarily in philosophers
but in poets um in, in the vast literature
produced by um uh those in, in, in the
western tradition, also in, in various religious traditions as
well. So famously, Schopenhauer thinks that, you know, pessimism
is not a new thing at all. What he's
trying to, to capture philosophically is a sentiment or
a at least a hunch that there's something about
the world which we should be regretting rather than
celebrating. And he finds that, you know, entertained in
the world's great religions. So early Christianity, in particular,
the early church fathers, he reads Augustine as having
a kind of pessimistic outlook. Um BUT also in
non western traditions, most famously Buddhism, um he looks
at Buddhism and, and, and sees the seeds for
pessimistic thought that he's trying to draw out in
a more philosophically robust manner. Um And as we,
we'll probably talk about as well. I mean, a
lot of these later pessimists also looked back to
Socrates, right, controversially as a developer of this kind
of pessimistic outlook, um as someone who thought of
the material world as something that we need to
be saved from, we need to be liberated from
in some way. So there are um yeah, intellectual
predecessors to pessimism as a philosophy, but it really
comes to fruition as a, as a matter for
philosophers to dispute um in the 19th century
and why the 19th century exactly? I mean, were
there a specific circumstances back then? And I'm not
talking about any specific kind of circumstances. It could
have been social, political or simply intellectual. It could
have been just in the intellectual realm for some
reason that led to the rise of pessimism in
two centuries ago.
Yeah, that, that's a really good question. And then
of course, it's, it's, there's no uncontroversial answer to
that. So let me, let me make a distinction
here. So, uh at the time and I think
still today, um there is a view that look
pessimism as a philosophy is really a product of
the social and economic circumstances of the 19th century.
In Germany, the turmoil, the political turmoil um in
terms of internal revolutions, the attempt for unification of,
of the German states wars with, with surrounding countries,
um cholera epidemics, economic crashes failure, the failure of
kind of the previous enlightenment, optimism that really we
could unite everyone and we could improve people's lives
significantly. Um A lot of people have pointed to
those, those facts and thought. Well, it's, it's not
a coincidence that philosophical pessimism begins to be popular
and begins to spread throughout society, not just at
the academic level, but throughout society begins to be
entertained and endorsed. At the same time as these,
these events. It's a little bit too coincidental. So
there has been at the time and still today,
an attempt to reduce philosophical pessimism to really just
a symptom of the social circumstances. I'm happy to
go into a bit more detail about this, but
I feel like that, that that's a little bit
too simplistic. Um I think that the story has
to be a little bit more complicated than that.
Um There were features of the 19th century which
were remarkably uh which gave ri rise to a
lot of hope with people in Germany in the
19th century. The again, the uni final unification of
the of, of Germany as a state in the
18 seventies, huge scientific advances. So I think the
story is gonna be a little bit more complicated
there. And Nietzsche definitely weighs in on this. I
think what's more interesting is the intellectual circumstances which
give rise to pessimism, right? So what you've got
happening in the 19th century following on from, from
the the latter half of the 18th century, where
people start openly challenging arguments for the existence of
God and the place of religious institutions um in
society, right? So you had human cans pretty devastating
critiques of the traditional arguments for the existence of
God and of metaphysical speculation more broadly, right? That
is speculation about unconditioned reality, that reality is not
filtered through our experiences, skepticism about if, if we
can have any kind of knowledge of, of those
matters, you had also the explosion of progress in
the empirical sciences and the and the the growth
of interest in materialism, which is one of the
the greatest philosophical disputes in the 19th century was
over materialism, this idea that everything could be explained
in terms of physical matter um that had implications
for how we might be able to deflate or,
or give reductionist accounts of things like the, the
soul of free will of morality, God, all of
these other things which we might have anchored our
sense of meaning or value in um these, these
kinds of things begin to affect people's consciousness. Um
And really challenge where we get our values from.
Um So, not only just the the explosion of
progress in the empirical sciences and the the um
the the criticism of the exist uh the arguments
of the existence of God, but also you have
the development of anthropology as well, right? So the
discovery of massive cultural difference, which again, I think
started to um become apparent in the 18th century
and just continued on to the 19th century discovery
of different cultural practices, which m which started to
shape this idea that the values we have here
in, in Europe or in, in northern Europe specifically
might not be the correct ones. Um They might
not be as so safe and secure as we
thought, there's all this diversity of, of belief in,
of beliefs and values, what accounts for that? Um
And then of course, you also had the development
of philological investigations into the nature of scripture, right,
in investigating texts like the Bible as natural phenomenon,
not as these divinely inspired um gifts from God,
but rather as um sort of a mismatch of
different traditions, often contradictory very human texts. Um And
then lastly, of course, and certainly not least the
development and um propagation of Darwinian evolution, right, which
had profound effects in m in multiple ways, right?
Not only that we could explain the origins and
complexities and apparent um purposes in nature without appeal
to a divine creator, but also just the pervasiveness
um and systematic nature of suffering in the animal
kingdom which humanity was then placed into not as
something special, um not as something which has been
given Dominion over life, but actually just as one
species among others. So I think that all of
this contributes to an intellectual context which starts to
provoke people into thinking, OK, well, if these are
the things we value, how have we come to
value them? And are they actually reachable? Are they
actually something that we can genuinely obtain? We've, as
we've sort of sort of assumed that whatever we
think is good and right in the world we
can have. Um BUT people I think start challenging
that in this intellectual context. And I think one
fruitful way of um having a general gloss on
this, which has been entertained by some, some people
in the secondary literature is that pessimism as people
like Schopenhauer developed, it was almost a reconfiguration of
the traditional problem of evil, right? So it's no
longer how could the world be so full of
suffering, um, and have a, have a kind of
all powerful and, and, and good God to, to
allow this to happen. But more how could there
ever be value or how could be anything good?
Right, in a world which is so violent and,
and, and so, um, seemingly hostile to our human
interests. So, I think that might be one kind
of nice general way of framing this as a
kind of secularization of a traditional um problem problem
of the Odyssey.
Mhm. And of course, we're focusing here mostly on
the intellectual side of things. But you also mentioned
at a certain point, there are possibly some of
the social and economic circumstances having played the role
back then. And of course, I would imagine that
if they haven't played any role at all, it
would be very weird because it's not that ideas
pop out of nowhere, right? I mean, people live
in a particular social, political economic context and so
on. And, and also I would imagine that another
factor that would have played the role and would
also help explain why it was specific philosophers having
this tendency toward pessimism. And this is probably a
point that Nietzsche would be happy to engage with
is that they have their own psychological predispositions as
well, right? I mean, shop and our uh if
I remember his family history correctly, even at several
ancestors who themselves committed suicide. So even from a
clinical psychology slash psychiatric perspective. I guess that he
probably was already a little bit innately predisposed toward,
uh, pessimism. I mean, that, that's just a comment.
But anyway.
Sure. Sure. And, yeah, and I think this is,
um, you're absolutely right that this was certainly a,
uh, a popular way of trying to understand why
this deeply provocative and counterintuitive view came to such
prominence. Um, YOU start thinking, ok. Well, if this
is, this is very, this is a very strange
view. How could this have been produced? What kind
of psychology leads to this kind of view? Um
And particularly 19th century and since then, where there
is a kind of, there's a tendency to psychologize
and even pathologize a lot of our beliefs and
values. This was particularly pronounced in the case of
pessimism. And if and even other pessimists did this
to Schopenhauer, they thought, wait a minute. Um This
is a, this is a guy that um clearly
has some kind of um you know, deep deeper
neurosis or even pathological brain disorder or something like
this. And this is what's leading him to have
these views. Um And his, even his style of
writing that you would claim gives a way that
he was more um motivated by these, yeah, by
personal resentment or uh you know, towards, towards, for
his mother, for example, who he had a very
kind of tense relationship with um his resentment towards
maybe, yes, his, his father who who most likely
committed suicide. Um These were thought to explain why
he had these pessimistic views. Um And, and also
the social circumstances, but Schopenhauer was aware of this
though and he, he tried to get ahead of
that by uh formulating particular arguments that he thought
would force people to rationally engage with. Um And
again, he writes a letter to one of his,
one of his uh close friends towards the end
of his career where he attacks um Ko Fischer's
history of philosophy where Fisher tries to say that.
Well, Schopenhauer's philosophy, his pessimism is really a product
of its time. Um You know, if he lived
a few centuries earlier, he would have, he would
have been an optimist and Schopenhauer Ridic ridicules this
and he's very angry and he says, you know,
this person really does believe that if I was
born sort of 40 years earlier, I'd be alive,
NZ and optimist. Um YOU know, this is, this
is how ridiculous uh the influence of Hegel's philosophy
can be on people, right? Um And uh and
he, he even gives reason. He says, look, uh
the time that I was writing was actually one
of optimism, it was one of hope. Um And
yet still I offered AAA reasoned account for um
his world view. So, yeah, I, I perhaps we'll
come on to this later when we talk about
Nietzsche. But um certainly, uh there is, there was
a tendency and I think there still is a
tendency to psychologize or, or pathologize um individual pessimists.
Um And what is motivating them to defend this
provocative view.
So let's get into Nietzsche then and since we're
talking about pessimism here specifically, when did Nietzsche first
engage with pessimism philosophically?
Good? Yeah. So I think he starts engaging with
pessimism really in the 18 sixties when he becomes
aware of Schopenhauer. And he, he really becomes obsessed
with Schopenhauer. He sits down with the, with the
world as one of representation and, and devours this
text and, and really becomes an, an ardent schopenhauerian.
I wouldn't say a wholly uncritical schopen Harian because
there he writes a short essay in 1868 called
on Schopenhauer, where he gives some pretty sophisticated criticisms
of his metaphysics, but he certainly is, is thinks
of himself as a Schopen Harian and intends to
develop connections with other people uh interested in Schopenhauer
and even to sort of propagate Schopenhauerian philosophy. Um
And so he becomes exposed to, to pessimism there
for the first time, he becomes sympathetic to it.
Um He reads eventually other pessimists um like Eduard
Von Hartmann, uh who was the, the probably the
most famous pessimist during the pessimism dispute, the pessimist
must strike of the, from 1860 to 1900. Mhm.
Um And so he becomes, he, I think Nietzsche
is sympathetic to, to pessimism. He's concerned about its
implications. And I think that when he comes to
write the birth of tragedy in 1872. Um He
really does believe the descriptive component of, of Schopenhauer's
world view, namely that suffering is ubiquitous. And it's,
it's simply naive to think that we can significantly
reduce suffering in the world. And he does think
that if one seriously believes this, um one will
be led to the, the view that life is
not worth living, but it would be better if
we were just not born in the first place.
And like Schopenhauer, he sees elements of this entertained
by the writers of Greek tragedy, right? Eur Euripides
Sophocles. Um AND he's very concerned with in, in
his early philosophy, he's very concerned with the implications
of pessimism, right? What would, what would happen, what
would be the consequences if we were to look
honestly and deeply at the world um and see
its suffering. And one of the things he thinks
will happen is this danger of, of what he
calls quietism. And this was, this was already a
debate during a pessimism dispute that pessimism would lead
to a kind of resignation or withdrawal from the
world. A complete lack of interest in trying to
improve people's lives. So what you'd get is a
kind of unacceptable level of um conservative inertia, right?
Where you, there's just no point in trying to
improve anything. It's a kind of worst kind of
apology for the status quo. This was the in
the social domain. What a lot of people worried
about pessimism. Um Nietzsche has a slightly different take
on that. He's worried about quietism, but it's not
from any moral position. He's not worried about, you
know, how, how this would prevent improving people's lives
and caring for the poor, but rather it would
be a kind of existential paralysis. People would be
gripped by the horror of existence and negate from
this world. They would, they would turn away from
it. They would have this kind of what he
calls a Buddha like denial of the will. They'd
be like Hamlet, they'd stare at the world in
horror and be paralyzed. Um That's what he's concerned
about. And I think his, in his early work
and the birth of tragedy is really an attempt
to find some way of resisting that implication.
Right? Mhm. But could we say that Nietzsche was
a pessimist himself in any way, or at least
that he had a pessimistic phase in his intellectual
life?
I think it would be fair um to say
that he, in his early phase, he was a
pessimist. And I think this is the sort of
dominant view in the secondary literature as well that,
that schopen Harian themes and, and particularly his pessimism
is a sort of fundamental assumption or presupposition of
the birth of tragedy. Um And he does accept
this idea that suffering is ubiquitous and that this
has profound implications for the value of life. And
he takes it to be a truth. Right? Pessimism
to be a, something that is verifiable. Ok. And
that's a, that's a key point I think of
his early. So
at least with the premises he agrees with.
Yeah, I think so. Yeah. But at the same
time I think that he is in some way
still trying to resist pessimism. Right. And, and the
way you could cash that out is to say
it's really the implications of it, which he thinks
um are quite literally life threatening, right? If you
take this view seriously, um there is a, a,
a big existential price to pay. Um And he's
trying to figure out if there's some kind of,
has there been any way of resisting the implications
of this? And of course, he's looking to ancient
Greek tragedy as something quite peculiar and spectacular. Um
A sort of healthy way of looking at life,
not through turning away and pretending that there's no
suffering, but by staring it in the face and
then somehow channel channeling the um energy or the
sort of affirmative affect um dispositions that the, the,
the ancient Greeks were able to channel um through
witnessing all of this suffering and, and, and perceiving
it in this, in this certain kind of artistic
way. He's wondering if there's any way that that
could be recaptured um in his modern day for
the contemporary Europeans um of his day. Um And
again, that's part of what the project of the
birth of tragedy is, is really to try and
trying to recapture that um if possible
recapturing some of the Dion Asian spirit. Right.
Exactly. Yes. And he uses this kind of, he
has this rapturous tone where he's using this terminology
which of course horrified um his fellow academics in
philology who are expecting a very kind of dry
and boring uh kind of strict analysis of Greek
tragedy where instead they got this almost uh religious
um sort of approach to uh uh to, to,
to the effects of Greek tragedy and this kind
of cultural rejuvenation project that he's interested in, uh
which really ruined his reputation among academic philologists. But
um yeah, Nietzsche wasn't really concerned about that and
he was, he was more concerned about how outside
of academic philosophy, um pessimism is a genuine concern,
right? It's not, it's not a problem that is
reserved for people studying in the university, lecture theaters
and libraries, right? This is a cultural issue. Uh
And this brings out Nietzsche, not just as someone
who in my view can engage with the intellectual
discourse of the age, but also someone who is
deeply concerned with the he, he's a culture critic
at the end of the day, he's interested in
how different cultural trends move in different directions and
for what reasons and, and importantly, the existential implications
of those. And I think that that's right, he's
looking at the Ancient Greeks and thinking what kind
of cultural circumstance, social circumstances produced this kind of
healthy affirmative attitude towards life. How did they harness
art to do that? And do we have any
kind of cultural, um, apparatus to be able to
do that same thing today?
Mhm. So, I would imagine. And that's something that
you actually go through in the book that over
the course of his intellectual life, Nietzsche, it changed
a little bit over time, the views that he
had on pessimism, right? So, uh but at the
very beginning when he started engaging with pessimism, what
were perhaps the main questions he grappled with? So
we've already established here that at least with some
of its premises he agreed with. But then what
did they think were the most important questions to
address regarding the possible consequences of pessimism?
Yeah. Good question. So I, I think that um
I in my view in that early period in
the birth of tragedy, um he's really interested in
trying to map out the possible responses to honest
reflections upon uh uh upon the world about the
nature of reality. So I, I should say as
well just to make this the context uh for
just to make this context more uh comprehensible, he's
responding to pessimism in its most popular hedonic form,
right? So it's all about suffering, right? The ubiquity
of suffering, whether that is in principle reducible, um
uh what kind of interpretations we could give to
suffering, to give it some kind of meaning both
of these questions I think he's interested in, right?
So just to clarify in its sed donic form,
then that means that if people who, who espouse
that kind of view would perhaps think that life
would be, would be good or worth living if
it was mostly or just about pleasure, happiness or
something along those lines.
That's right. Yeah. So th this is the form
which I think dominates the pessimism dispute is that
um life would be worth living if pleasure was
some or satisfaction of desires, perhaps was something lasting
and achievable and something which outweighed the, the pain
and suffering which we experience. But for systematic reasons,
the pessimists argue that's just not possible, right? We're
always left in a, in a hedonic deficit where
where there's just suffering and pleasure can never in
principle outweigh it. Um And Nietzsche, it is because
that was such that was the dominant view in
the dispute. He's taking that as his starting point,
I think. Um But he's also interested in the
question of what kind of meaning we give to
suffering, right? Can we conceive of it, of having
some kind of um purpose that we maybe even
just project to it some kind of narrative we
can give for our struggles. I think that that's
very prominent in his later work, but it it's
still there in his early work. But um yes,
so for Nietzsche, the primary questions, I think he's
interested in the birth of tragedy are what are
the implications of honestly looking at the world, seeing
the ubiquity of suffering, the pervasiveness of suffering. Um
What are the implications of that? And he starts
off by saying that, you know, there's a number
of possible responses people could have to this, right?
They're not all gonna be, they might initially take
their Hamlet's view of things, right? And be paralyzed
with horror and disgust at the world. Um But
there are a few different ways of, of responding
to this like one for that he, he entertains.
Um IS this idea that people would be so
horrified that they would commit suicide or even perhaps
um kill other people out of mercy, right? And
he talks about this, it's this passage where he
talks about the people would strangle others out of,
out of, you know, their family members and friends
out of mercy because they wouldn't want to put
them through the misery of life. You know, he
talks about how the Fiji Islanders do this and
it actually recurs in his notebooks as well. He
must have read some anthropological note about it, but
this is perhaps one response to pessimism is suicide
or perhaps even killing other people. Um And I
think that this is actually a reference to Edward
Von Hartmann who thought that ultimately, the later down
the line, there would be a kind of what
he calls a cosmic universal negation of the will
where there would just be a collective resignation from
life, a kind of ceasing of life um refusal
to, to reproduce the end of humanity as we
know it. So that, that's one thing that I
think Nietzsche think there's a possibility if people start
to take pessimism seriously. Um But the one that
really interests him and the one that he thinks
is culturally embedded is quietism, right? This, this idea
that one would re just refrain from engaging with,
with life at all. One would turn against their,
their dispositions for, you know, uh desires for sex,
for food, all of our fundamental desires, one would
see them as um sort of lacking any value
but almost evil, right? Producing suffering.
This quietism connect in any way to asceticism.
Y Yes, I think it does for Nietzsche. Yes.
So quietism um is the the practical form of
that the practical manifestation of this kind of disposition
is to cease indulging in your most fundamental dispositions
or as as Nietzsche call it later hit their
drives, right? So an aesthetic is someone who feels
enlightened by their knowledge of the world. And as
a result, their practical response is to do things
like fasting, to abstain from what they see as
the cause of their suffering,
a kind of behaviors that basically we would see
among monks and people like that.
Yes, generally. Yeah. And, and, and also Nietzsche shares
schopenhauer's diagnosis of Buddhism as advocating this as a
kind of pessimistic view, which sees asceticism as a
um a, a positive thing, which is the result
of a profound insight, an appropriate practical response, but
they obviously just have a very different evaluation of
that, right? Um So, so Nietzsche's primary concern, I
think is how to try and avoid quietistic despair.
And again, not, I think for the reasons that
other people in the in the dispute were worried
about quietism, namely as a moral or political problem,
right? Where people thought that this would actually be,
this would be an affront to morality uh because
people would cease to engage in trying to improve
the lives of their, their peers and fellow citizens
and fellow humans. Um Nietzsche doesn't seem all concerned
by that in the birth of tragedy, he's more
concerned that this would have profound existential implications for
the individual and the implications for cultures broadly as
being a culture of, of despair and and um
sort of uh yes resignation from from any endeavors
for creativity or anything like this. So he contrasts
that kind of quietistic response with the want, the
sort of what he calls a Socratic response, which
would be, this reflects just a modern kind of
enlightenment view that actually suffering is an accidental feature
of the world. And that with the right kind
of development of scientific progress, social engineering, the use
of technology, um good governance, we can eradicate most
forms of material suffering and improve people's lives. Um
There are a lot of people in the dispute
who thought something like that. Um But Nietzsche thinks
that this is hopeless for schopen haren reasons. He
thinks that it's futile to try and eradicate. Suffering
nature is intrinsically violent and unjust as he says,
um And what you'll do, you'll maybe get rid
of one form of suffering over here, but it'll
just resurface as another form. Um And here's a
few, few arguments for that. But um he ultimately
thinks that this Socratic sort of rationalistic attitude to
suffering is ultimately futile. So you're left either with
quietism ultimately or hopefully. And this is the, the
later parts of the text, some other alternative which
tries to harness aesthetic experience and art in order
to affect our, our dispositions or emotional dispositions towards
the world to find suffering, not an objection to
life, but something invigorating and life affirming. That's, that's
his the third option which he's hoping to um
give some credence to in the birth of tragedy.
Mhm So uh a book of his that you
get into in your own book is human, all
too human. So what kinds of arguments did they
develop there against pessimism? Why is this book so
important when it comes to understanding his approach to
pessimism?
Yeah. So, II, I think that the human all
too human in the pessimism in the context of
the pessimism dispute has been sort of unjustly overlooked
really in terms of its importance because there are
major changes there in Nietzsche's philosophical um position, which
have huge ramifications for how he thinks of the
attempts to evaluate life, generally, how we should think
of suffering. Um What the role of science should
be, what the role of religion should be. Um
So he writes this book in 1878 and that,
that's significant because it really, this is, he writes
this at a time where he's really broken from
his personal and philosophical allegiances to Wagner, who he
at one time shared a enthusiasm for Schopenhauer and
Schopenhauer in worldview with. And he also, you know,
venerated Wagner for his potential ability to rejuvenate German
culture in this affirmative way that he was describing
in the birth of tragedy. He gives that up
in 1878. And what you find there, particularly in
the first book is a enthusiasm for the ability
of the empirical sciences to offer knowledge. Um AND
to um speak to some of the traditional concerns
that, that, that, that occupied people in this, in
the pessimism dispute. So the Empirical Sciences, right? Um
NATO Wizen Shaft and the Natural Sciences. Um He,
he thinks have the ability to completely reform how
we think of the human, how the human being
engages with the world and our place within the
world. Um He comes to think of art, right?
The artistic response to the world as, as you
know, this idea that we need aesthetic experience to
almost um give us a kind of useful illusion
that actually things are beautiful and, and sublime. Um
He, he comes to think of this as really
a distraction from, from the root problem. Um And
that science could in fact be harnessed to alleviate
suffering to a significant degree. This is a massive
change in his in attitude towards suffering. In my
view. There's multiple passages where he thinks that, you
know, religion and art share the same kind of
defect in that they actually prolong um a kind
of suffering in so far as they, what they
do is really put a bandage over a a
AAA kind of severed artery, right? They can kind
of temporarily deal with it with this issue of
existential dread in the face of suffering, but really,
they don't get to the root of the the
problem, they don't even get close to it. And
this is where he thinks that understanding um the
role of science and, and harnessing scientific power could
in fact do this. Um So he's in a,
a fairly kind of um hopeful um error of
his thought where he really does think. So, you
know what he was saying in the birth of
tragedy was, was not right at all. But he
he more directly goes after pessimism by harnessing what
some people call a frame of reference argument, right?
So what he tries to do is to say
that hold on a minute, this whole pessimism dispute
is premised upon a mistake. We can't give evaluations
of life as such. That's just a, a wholly
mistaken enterprise, right? Pessimists want to say life is
itself a bad thing. Optimists want to say that
life is itself a good thing. Um Nietzsche comes
to think um that this is, this is a
mistake and his argument is something like the following
like can and the neo neo canteens, he thinks
that our experience of the world is filtered through
our sensory apparatus and our drives, right? Drives are
these kinds of patterns or dispositions towards certain kinds
of, yeah, patterns of behavior, um sort of a
pressure to act in certain ways and affects are
these kind of first personal experiences of those drives,
right? So we have all of these various drives
and each of things which are competing in various
ways and they, they structure and or give a
sort of orientation of our experience to the world.
They reg you know, things register our attention more
than others, depending upon the calibration of our drives.
Everything we experience is almost filtered through this apparatus,
this cognitive apparatus. Now, Nietzsche thinks this has quite
big implications for how we think of values, right?
So for him, uh values are going to be
things which we have in accordance with our, with
our drives, right? We'll have an experience of uh
say we'll have a drive towards sex, for example,
our X will sort of have a sort of
positive or negative appraisal of this drive. And this
the pattern of these, the stable pattern of these
drives, he thinks give rise to our values, these,
these kinds of things we take to be good
or bad because our values are so deeply entwined
with our psychology. And he thinks along with the
neo canteens that we can't really ever get behind
right? Reality, uh We can't understand reality outside of
our drive orientation. Um We can't really say anything
about unconditioned experience or the thing in itself, right?
We can't really say anything about how, how, how
reality or existence is as such. We only ever
have our perspective of it. And of course, this
gives rise to his later very famous perspective is
which people have debated quite a lot about in.
So
at least when it comes to Kan Metaphysics, he
agrees with that distinction between the noon and the
phenomenon
at this point, he has a sort of naturalized
version of that. Yeah. So he doesn't have the
same canteen arguments, but he thinks that he can
give a sort of physiological um psychological account of
this same distinction that there, there might be some
kind of thing in itself or unconditioned reality that
might be different to how we, how we perceive
things in the world. But we can't know that
in principle because we're always working with this cognitive
apparatus that we have everything everything is filtered through
that. So he one way of interpreting here is
a kind of naturalized Neo canteen. And he thinks
this has big implications for evaluations of life as
such because we just can't make those kinds of
judgments. Our valuations are always prejudicial and idiosyncratic. And
here he's drawing a lot upon the debates from
Neo canteens like Langer uh who he, he read
and, and very much admired um Vinal Band and
also positivists like Algo Ding, right? They, they had
this kind of idea that valuations are in some
sense, impure or unjust. These are terms Nietzsche uses
straight from during. Um And that because we have
this p perspective or prejudicial perspective, when we're evaluating
things, it just doesn't really make any sense to
say life as such is good or life as
such is bad, right? The whole pessimism dispute is
premised on a mistake. And so this is a
major turn away from the position of the birth
of tragedy where he was quite happy to say
that it's you can verify pessimism as something being
true or false, right? There's a truth condition to
it, I think in a in human or to
human, we see him shift away from that quite
dramatically because of his enthusiasm for the empirical sciences
here, what they're able to achieve. Um And yes,
the implications of that for thinking about human psychology
in this, in this kind of more naturalistic fashion.
Um So I think that's the, the major argument
I think, which lays a foundation for a lot
of what he wants to do in his mature
work, this kind of frame of reference argument, which
says that, you know, pessimistic valuations really, uh they
don't, they're either incoherent um or they, they just
make a claim that is just epistemic unavailable to
us. And so the, the, the whole debate is,
is premised upon a confusion.
Mhm So you probably already touched on this point.
But one of the things that you point to
in your book is one of his critics of
pessimism was a psychological one, a psychological critic of
pessimism. So what is it really about? What is
he referring to there?
Good. Yeah. So again, and this is something I
try and emphasize in the book is that the
this very famous kind of Nietzschean critique of various
kinds of moralities um or evaluative outlooks in terms
of the assertive psychology um in the context of
the pessimism dispute, this is not an original argument
of Nietzsche's, he's actually developing existing psychological criticisms um
of pessimism. So the view is something like this
and, and I think this frame of reference argument
from human to human really does lay the groundwork
for this because it allows him to say, well,
ok, if pessimism is not really, if it's premised
upon a confusion, what leads people to make these
evaluations, right? And he eventually comes to this idea
because of his drive psychology that when someone makes
an evaluation about the world or any kind of
um allegedly descriptive metaphysical view about the world, you
know, that it's a manifestation of a contradictory will
or, or whatever it is, um this can be
explained in terms of one's moral values, right? So
your metaphysical world, worldview, descriptive worldview can be explained
in terms of the asserted moral world, uh moral
values and those moral values can be explained in
terms of the assertive psychology or even physiology, right?
That's a classic Nietzschean strategy for approaching various kinds
of, of worldviews. He comes to think of pessimism
as constituted by at least two psychological dispositions, right?
So the first one is, he thinks of pessimists
as led to endorse their view to, to endorse
this, this view of the world because they are
they suffer from a kind of exhaustion or weakness
of will, right? And the view is something like
this, the human being is a battleground of various
competing drives that are constantly vying for supremacy. They're
pulling us in all these directions and this can
cause a a large degree of suffering, especially if
you lack the self control to sort of um
calibrate these drives and refine them and sort of
harness them for some kind of unified goal. He
thinks that special kinds of people have the sort
of strength of will to be able to do
this. And he sort of gives examples like Goethe
and Julius Caesar and Cesare Borger and whatnot. But
most people are not able to do this. So
what, what does a person in that kind of
position? What is the phenomenal quality of, of this
kind of um situation, right? Where you've got all
these drives vying for supremacy. He thinks this is
inevitably going to lead to a certain kind of,
yeah, exhaustion, um kind of uh fatigue or painful
frustration where you're at, the the person is just
at the, at the whims of these various drives.
Ok? Inevitably, he thinks this is going to lead
to a an effective condition where you see life
as a chore. Everything registers, registers to this person
as a task to be done as a chore
to be done. Another thing which produces this toil
and yearning for peace. Ok? And he comes to
have this view that this is one way in
which pessimism can look very attractive and can lead
the person in this position can be led to
uh endorse this, this worldview that actually, yeah, life
is, is, is the problem. Life is against me.
Um And so it's a kind of vindication, right?
Of this person's experience of the world that oh,
it's, it's not because I'm particularly, you know, vulnerable
or weak. It's because the world is deficient, right?
It's, it's, it's, it's contradictory. It's, it's kind of
faulty in some way. Um And so what he
eventually thinks happened is that look this pain of
exhaustion leads to what this very famous Nietzschean um
concept of rezoning on. Right? This idea that someone
who is harmed and becomes very vengeful and wants
to take revenge on their perceived oppressor, but can't
because they don't have the strength, they get this
kind of bottled up, seething resentment. And Nietzsche thinks
that something quite interesting can happen creatively when someone
suffers from this most famously in the genealogy of
morals. He thinks that this is a social condition
where a particular class of people can be oppressed
by uh sort of an aristocratic class and they
can their res Ryon on towards that class can
produce a new set of values in this context.
He thinks that you can have ryste on not
in a socially directed way but in a world
directed way, right? So you have him on towards
life itself and it sounds quite irrational. But this
is exactly what Nietzsche thinks is going on with
the psychology of these, these people is that they're
pushed and pulled in all these directions. They suffer
a result, they need someone to blame, but there's
no one to blame. So they blame life itself.
And this manifests as a sort of what philosophical
pessimism is in niche's view is a sort of
post hoc rationalization of those feelings of rossant t
on you. They, these pessimists like Hartmann and Banter
and Mainlander, all of the people that came after
Schopenhauer. Um All of their philosophies are really just
ways of coping with their, their conditions, right? Their
conditions of weakness which produce these, this suffering which
leads to resent him on. Ok. So he, he
thinks that philosophical pessimism is a very elaborate and
very clever sort of concoction for dealing with or
satisfying these feelings of roon on. So that's one
kind of psychological reduction he gives of pessimism in
his mature work is that this really isn't a
philosophy at all. You can, you can really explain
philosophical pessimism as a product of one's psychology or
physiology.
Mhm. And what is the relationship then between pessimism
and nihilism specifically? Because nihilism, I, I mean, of
course, there's a relationship there and we're just about
to talk about it, but Nietzsche also worried specifically
about nihilism,
right. That's, yeah, that's absolutely right. And, um, you
know, in his mature works, in particular, um Nihilism
becomes the, seems to be the central theme, right?
He, he starts thinking of the pessimism dispute as
something that really, people are spilling ink over. But
really it, it's, it's a pointless endeavor. You can't
convince someone with reasons out of their pessimism, it's
futile. Um, YOU know, this is why he, he
sort of almost reverts back to the aesthetic position
of the birth of tragedy because, you know, you
can't just like you can't treat a physi physiological
disease like cancer or something by refuting it, right?
You need to treat it in various ways So
he thinks the the pessimism dispute as a philosophical
phenomenon is a waste of time. And he starts
to focus more effort on responding to nihilism. And,
and again, this is an important point which I
think is sometimes lost nihilism at the time. And
I still think today did not have a generally
understood fixed definition in the way that pessimism did.
So during the pessimism dispute, it was well understood
that this was the view that life is not
worth living, right? Nihilism can be used in a
variety of different ways and there's no kind of
fixed de facto definition of that. And I think
even Nietzsche uses it in a variety of ways.
So I'll, I'll give you sort of one way
of understanding the relation. So not, whereas pessimism is
the view that look, there are genuine meaning conferring
values. Um But it's just that the world is
such that it doesn't allow us to realize them.
Nihilism is the view that, that it's, there's nothing
wrong with the world as such, but rather it's
that there are no meaning conferring values, right? So
it's a, it's a very different, a this version
of Nihilism is a very different um d different
position um with respect to the the existence of
values, right? So Ni Nihilists typically think that whatever
the values are, which give us meaning and demand
our as ascension, demand our response to them. Um
They just don't exist. And so we're left in
this kind of position of um yeah, despair about
uh despair about um the state of the world,
right? So the the version of Nihilism, which I
think Nietzsche is most interested in is not so
much a cognitive belief. It's not necessarily a belief
that there are no values, but it's more an
affective condition. It's this condition that life is something
that one feels revulsion or disgust at. And this
provokes this practical response of resignation. So he describes,
for example, Christianity as being a intrinsically nihilistic perspective
on the world, right? And of course, Christianity thinks
that there are genuine values. Um BUT it's just
that they can't be, they can't be realized. But
the the effective condition that the Christian has Nietzsche
thinks is that they, they have this kind of
disgust towards life with themselves, to with their most
fundamental natures as sort of um striving and you
know, particularly sexual beings. Um OUR most fundamental drives
are demonized. These are claims. Um AND this is
a kind of nihilism where we're disgusted by life.
Our attitudes to life are are one of a
completely negative appraisal we yearn for some kind of
better world beyond. And in this case, the Christian
version, it's, yeah,
it's basically a revulsion toward worldly things, right? I
mean, because I the ideal is to go to
heaven and then in heaven probably you can fully
realize your values. I mean that that's actually something
that also, um, that it's an idea that can't
also add in the critique of practical reason. That,
uh, I mean, when it comes to the antinomy
of reason, one of them was that we can't
be sure if, um, life is, uh, if there's
life after death actually. But, uh, yeah, I mean,
a according to his moral views, there had to
be one because it was only in uh eternal
existence. Let's say that we would be able to
fully realize ourselves morally.
That, that, that's right. Yeah, it's a practical question
as he describes it, we have to sort of
take it for granted that there could be because
that's the only way that there could be a
genuine meeting of the demand for value. Um And,
and I think that again, this is one of
Nietzsche's insights that there's, there's really not that much
of a fundamental distinction between Christianity, um contemporary European
morality canteen, um Metaphysics, uh Platonic Metaphysics, right? What
all of these things have in common for Nietzsche
and what makes them all Nihilistic is that they
all have some conception of a better world beyond
which both explains the value, the earthly value that
uh uh uh sorry, the earthly world that we
inhabit. And also not only does it explain it,
but it evaluates it, right? It debases in, in
Nietzsche's view, the material physical world that we inhabit,
this becomes something that we're just waiting to leave
and that we need salvation from, right.
It's a form of negation of life, at
least to some extent. Yeah, I think that this
is right that um you know, we become, we
become disgusted with this life because we see it
as subordinate to some kind of world behind or
world beyond. Um THIS world that we experience. Yeah.
So I think that that he comes to have
an interest in nihilism partly as it as it's
expressed through these kinds of worldviews, right? Um And
this, this comes eventually to, to replace his interest
in, in the, in philosophical pessimism. But the point
I try and make in the book is that
we can only really fully appreciate that point as
it's a, as a as this has come to
be as part of a sort of process in
Nietzsche's thought through engaging with philosophical pessimism through debates
which were already going on in the 19th century.
Um This is how he gets to nihilism and,
and to be fair, he there's even points in
his, his writing in the, in the notebooks where
he's just talks about pessimism as a preliminary form
of nihilism, right? He sees it as a kind
of early manifestation of this nihilistic position, which is
primarily an effective kind of yeah, disposition or attitude
towards life as something to be disgusted by. Yeah.
So earlier, we talked a little bit about hedonic
pessimism. But what were Nietzsche's ideas about hedonism itself?
And did they link it to pessimism in any
way.
Yeah. Good. That's a good question. Um, SO certainly
in the mature works, um, he is openly hostile
to hedonism as an account of value. Right. So
he takes positions which endorse a hedonic outlook. So
utilitarianism and, and other views similar, um, to be
not only sort of confused about human psychology, but
also to be wrong headed about the kinds of
things which are good and ought to be pursued.
Um There's a question here about how this links
up with Nietzsche's meta ethics. But I'll, I'll put
that to the side just for the purposes of
this. Um He comes to be highly critical of
hedonism as a position in its own, right? But
also as it, as it, its role um in
legitimating pessimism, right? So he, he sees pessimists like
Eduard Von Hartmann, Philip Mainlander. Um AND, and to
an extent Schopenhauer as endorsing this idea that, well,
pessimism is simply the matter that, you know, you
look at the world. If there's more suffering than
pleasure, then then it's bad. And it's just this
kind of weighing game where you figure, figure out
how much pleasure there is in the world. And
he comes to really have a sort of disdainful
attitude towards this and, but for different reasons, right?
So one of the reasons I think he has
a problem with hedonism is that he ch he
tries to provoke his reader into looking at the,
what the pinnacle of a hedonic life would be
like someone who's experiencing maximal pleasure, doesn't have to
struggle with any toil or anything like this. And
he's trying to provoke in his reader a sense
of disgust at that ideal. He says, you know,
look at these kinds of people who would be,
you know, basically like herd animals like cows in
the field, just wandering around eating grass and, and
grazing and not doing much. This really ought to
provoke disgust if you have this artistic creative disposition.
So I think that Nietzsche cares, he's inviting his
readers or specific readers to care about the values,
the perfectionist values, which I think Nietzsche himself cared
about the most, which is artistic creativity, um achievement,
overcoming obstacles tends to cash this out in terms
of will to power. Um But he certainly thinks
that pessimism and hedonism are, are related, right? This
kind of, he sometimes describes it as sort of
pessimism of sensibility. This kind of, well, if, if
pessimism is really just weighing up pleasure and pain
and you find the world wanting, um you know,
this is no world view for someone who has
the sort of artistic creativity, um these kind of
protect perfectionist values that Nietzsche tends to entertain. Um
So he attacks pa uh hedonism on these grounds
that it's just not a suitable. Um EVEN the
ideal of hedonism is not a life worth living
um for the sort of i the admirable um
human being, right? And he tends to try and
try and provoke the reader into a just, you
know, distancing himself from hedonism through affective means. So
he harnesses again, revulsion and admiration, right? As elements
that he wants to, to evoke in his readers
to try and get them to steer away from
these kinds of these kinds of outlooks. And so
certainly he thinks hedonism is a important part of
at least a form of pessimism um or the
dominant forms of pessimism. But he really thinks that
this is contrary to his conception of a, of
a well lived life, which is one in terms
of creativity.
Well, I would imagine that you would also not
be very fond of utilitarians then.
That's right. Yeah, he certainly has very little positive
things to say about utilitarians and he particularly reserves
his uh most potent scorn for Jon Stewart Mill
um in this respect. So, I mean, there's a
passage in there's 225 of beyond good and evil
where he puts pessimism and utilitarianism in the same
bracket in the same sentence, he dismisses it and
sort of says, look, their attitude to suffering is,
is despicable because as soon as suffering arises, they
don't see any value in it. No, they don't
see it as an opportunity for growth, for creativity.
They want to s to stamp it out as
soon as it, it rears its head. And this
really does an injustice to suffering's power to be
harnessed. Yeah, in creative achievement in various domains. So
he says that the discipline of suffering, of great
suffering has created all of the enhancements of man
so far, he says in that passage, and um
really his problem with hedonism and as you said,
utilitarianism is that they have a kind of wholly
mistaken understanding of how suffering arises and its causes,
but also what its potential value can be.
So that is then the value that Nietzsche attributes
to suffering in life in the later stages of
his intellectual life.
That's right. Yeah. So in the, in the mature
works, um there's multiple passages where he's trying to
invite the reader to see, to, to, to sort
of completely change their attitude to suffering which we've
inherited through, you know, thousands of years of conditioning
in, in, in contemporary morality, right? Seeing suffering as
an objection to life as something that we need
to stamp out. He's inviting his readers to try
and have a sort of quite radical cognitive shift
to see suffering as a potential opportunity for growth
as some kind of some kind of yeah, evaluative
opportunity for achievement. Um And I I don't think
that Nietzsche thinks this is something everyone can do.
I think he's really thinks this is something that
specific individuals will be able to achieve because it's
not easy to look upon suffering as yeah, potentially
a good thing and, and maybe even not just
wholly instrumentally right? So many people think that suffering
can help them achieve something, but it's still a
regrettable feature like it would have been better to,
you know, write the novel, you always wanted to
write without the suffering and the toil that you
went through. I think Nietzsche's even challenging that view
and thinking that suffering is not just instrumental to
great achievements, but it is actually constitutive of them.
So part of what makes a great of a
great achievement is the suffering, right? And the overcoming
of the process of harnessing that suffering for a
creative end. Um So yes, I think he's in
the later works, trying to say that, you know,
in the context of the pessimism dispute, suffering can
have value and we can come to have an
affirmative cognitive um shift, yeah, a cognitive shift in
our effective attitudes towards life in a positive way
by changing our attitudes towards suffering and seeing it
as as having some value. And this is what
he sometimes describes as a the pessimism of strength,
right? The abi it's a kind of a kind
of attitude, it's not a sort of um theory
per se, but an attitude, the ability to see
suffering as an opportunity as having potential value,
right? Mhm And I would imagine that when you
refer there to the fact that he probably thought
that it would only be certain kinds of people
that would be able to deal with suffering in
life in a positive productive way, let's say, uh,
he would probably, uh, refer to people with certain,
it would probably be people with certain psychological traits.
Right. Because that's something that he, he talked about
a lot. Right. I mean, you, you had to
have a certain psychological predisposition toward, uh, life, moral
values and so on to really be able to
be, um, let's say someone that would understand Nietzsche's
writings.
That's right. I think this is just a general
feature. His writing is that he, I mean, he
constantly warns people against reading him. And this is
quite a sort of strange feature as an author
that he, he, he's constantly warning people saying this
isn't necessarily for you, you know, you need to
really think through whether this is what I'm saying
is really getting through to you. And, and I
think Nietzsche really does think that he's for people
who share some of his dispositions and values. And
that might be people who are suffering from some
kind of false consciousness that, you know, think that
maybe Christian morality might be, you know, they might
be ensnared by it, but really they have this
kind of psychological disposition to break free of that
and be a more affirming life affirming individual. And
I think Nietzsche's trying to tap into some of
our psychological dispositions for that. Um And again, yeah,
speak to some potential figures who could, could have
this kind of strength of will really to calibrate
their, the orientation of their drives in such a
way that they could find life worth living in
this very pragmatic sense. Right. So, it's not necessarily
that it's, they'd find ra uh j life to
be good in a sort of rational, rational way.
But they're necessarily, they wouldn't necessarily have that, but
they would come to see life as being worthy
and beautiful and worthy. Yeah. Worthy of affirmation. Um,
PURELY pragmatically. And I, yeah, I think, I think
you're right that Nietzsche doesn't think that I think
it doesn't think that everyone is capable of that.
There has to be a kind of right? Psychological
and uh yeah, psychological um um predisposition, predisposition or
framework in place for that. Yeah.
Yeah. OK. So let's get into the last question
of our interview here today. So we've already went
through some of the main ideas, at least the
ni had about pessimism. What about solutions and antidotes
to pessimism according to him. What can we do
about it? How can we approach it in a
positive way?
Good. Yeah. So one of the things I, I
try and get out in the book and I
think it's quite interesting is that the mature Nietzsche,
his answer to this question is really a coming
back full circle to the project uh or at
least the fundamental essence of the project in, in
the birth of tragedy, right? So he, I think
one of the things he tries to do is
to say that, ok, it, it's hopeless trying to
convince pessimists, um, out of their pessimism with reasons
and arguments for the reasons that we've talked about.
Um, WE need to instead try to engage their
psychological and emotional faculties. This is the only way
that you can free, at least with the people
with the, the psychological predisposition to, to, to do
something else. Um,
I guess that's also another one of the reasons
why he wrote the way he did.
Right. Absolutely. I think it's impossible really to divorce
his philosophical views from his stylistic uh approach because
you're not gonna find, you know, standard form arguments
and, and, you know, deductive inferences necessarily in Nietzsche
precisely because he thinks they're not really gonna have
the purpose, they're not gonna serve the purpose. Um
It's basically to try to engage with your emotions,
your psychology more directly.
That's right because he, he's of the view, which
is a lot of empirical evidence to support these
days is that you're far more likely to change
your mind and be jolted out of your views
through engagement with your emotional faculty. So he'll deploy
um techniques like trying to shame you or just,
you know, disgust you or entice you into admiring
something which contemporary morality says you really shouldn't because
he knows that this has far more of a
profound effect, right? Good. So, so he, with that
view in mind, he thinks that, you know, what,
what, what is one very profound way? Uh 11
profound kind of human experience uh which can be
induced uh through human creativity. Um And that's aesthetic
experience and experience of art in particular, right? So
he thinks that aesthetic experience um is interest his
version of it is interesting because it's quite anti
Schopenhauerian, right? So for Schopenhauer, our aesthetic experience is
will this contemplation of some platonic idea or form?
Right. So you, you what's pleasure about, about aesthetic
experience is that you're temporarily released from the pressure
of willing, right? So willing is painful and suffering
and striving and all that. Uh WHEN you see
something beautiful, you sort of look at the Mona
Lisa, for example, you forget your ordinary self as
a striving individual and you're pure, purely contemplating, right?
And that the pleasure of it is from the
relief of that suffering. Nietzsche doesn't have that view
at all, right? He actually associates aesthetic uh experience
with um a sort of activation of the will,
right? He describes it as a form of intoxication,
right? Rausch uses this term, it's almost like a
yeah, like a a like a drug rush or
something like this, you become in your will, becomes
enticed and excited and stimulated. And he thinks that
why is this important? Because if you present features
of the world which in individually look ugly and
and revolting, right? Like suffering if you present them
in a way which can make them appear beautiful.
It gives you this kind of distorted perspective, right?
Um Which is, which is strange because it's not
like it's, it's the painting or whatever depicting the
scene of suffering is distracting you from suffering. In
fact, many of these paintings can be very gory
and, and, you know, horrific. So you're, you're confronted
with it, but it's presented in such a way
through, through artistic finesse and skill that it's enticing
and stimulating to the will. And so what he
thinks is going on is that aesthetic experience can
almost sort of bring you back to affirming life
because it, it, it, yeah, invigorates your will, it
stimulates it rather than tries to suppress it. Um
And so aesthetic experience for him is gonna be
crucial in combating pessimism. Um BECAUSE not only would
it maybe present things which we typically take to
be objectionable in sort of a beautiful manner, but
it will actually have a physiological effect, right? And
this is this is if that's what gives rise
to pessimism, ultimately, that's gonna be the way that
you combat it by invigorating the will, finding your,
so trying to sort of effectively reattach your will
to life, right? Finding it as something beautiful. And
of course, for the strongest types of people, he
thinks that they will be able to take up
a kind of aesthetic perspective on life in some
kind of stable, broad, broad manner, right? And I
think that this is again, probably only gonna be
reserved for the few. But um something which he,
he, he um thinks is i it is a
possible way of responding to, to pessimism. Yeah,
great. So I think this is probably a good
point to wrap up our conversation on and the
book is again, Nietzsche's struggle against pessimism. Of course,
I'm leaving a link to it in the description
box of the interview and Doctor Asan just before
we go apart from the book, would you like
to tell people where they can find you and
your work on the internet?
Uh Yeah, sure. So you can find uh links
to my work on the department page at Cardiff.
Um I also have a website which is just
Patrick hassan.com and there's a list of, of lots
of my research there. Um I also have an
Academia edu page so feel free to, to have
a look at my papers there and feel free
to reach out with any, any questions or if
you just wanna chat about anything you find there?
Great. So look, I really loved our conversation and
the book and I hope that my audience goes
out and runs and buys it because it's a
very good book. And I, I am also very
fond of Nietzsche's philosophy, of course. So thank you
so much again for taking the time to come
on the show.
Thank you very much for having me. It was,
it was a real pleasure to talk to you.
Thank you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Zuk Mar Nevs called Hofi, Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel
Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz and La
Jung Y and the K Hes Mark Smith J.
Tom Hummel s friends, David W and the de
Ro Ro Diego, Jan Punter Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole
Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stass, Nale Me, Gary G
Alman Sam of Zaypj Barboza, Julian Price Edward Hall,
Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franka Gilon Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary FTW Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino,
Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Will Di A Cost. Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fist, Larry
Dey Junior, Old Eon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris to
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan Nicholas
Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perros,
Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar Masoud
Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca, Toni, Tom Veg and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon Benedikt Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.